Israel has reopened the arz Border
Crossing into Northern Gaza it's the
only Crossing into the north of the
territory but it was closed following
hamas's October 7th Terror attacks Aid
agencies had been calling for its
reopening for months to allow them to
deliver desperately needed food and
medicine to hundreds of thousands of
civilians at risk of
famine for more on that let's bring in
our correspondent Rebecca ritters in
Jerusalem Rebecca how how much of an
impact will the opening of the Aras
Crossing have on the humanitarian
situation in
Gaza well first I just want to clarify
that this isn't really a reopening yes
Ares uh was open obviously until October
7 and it was closed subsequently but it
was never a Goods Crossing it was always
a pedestrian Crossing and now it is
being used because obviously because of
the infrastructure that was there and
that has been now rebuilt around that
area to allow for trucks to cross
through so just not to conf use anybody
that is this is a reopening of um a
Goods Crossing um now of course in terms
of what benefit it will have of course
every bit of Aid Terry that gets through
into the besieged Gaza Strip is making a
difference will help every sack of rice
every box of medical supplies but this
opening of areas is by no means a silver
bullet certainly its location uh in the
north of the strip will uh get around
some of the logistical issues that are
faced by humanitarian workers trying to
distribute that Aid on the other side it
will be able to go straight into the
north of the strip which is facing some
of the worst conditions in the Gaza
Strip um but you know we're seeing
yesterday we saw 30 trucks pass through
that's a drop in the ocean really and
we'll just have to see how many continue
uh now it was pretty symbolically opened
on the day that um Secretary of State
Anthony blinkin was visiting because the
US have been putting a lot of pressure
on Israel to ensure that more
humanitarian Aid crossed through and
we'll have to see just how much can
contines to cross through Aras though of
course it's being hailed by blinken and
by humanitarian organizations as you
know very positive sign but we have seen
a drop in the amount of trucks that that
passed through in the last couple of
days according to un figures yesterday
uh we saw 130 or thereabouts crossed
through not clear whether that includes
those 30 going through uh the Aras
Crossing I don't believe that does
include those those trucks but from a
few days ago we were seeing many more so
whether or not Aras is going to have a
major impact
remains to be seen and of course the UN
warning that disease and famine are
increasing inside the
strip okay so that's more that's on the
humanitarian situation in Gaza what
about the ongoing ceasefire talks
Rebecca between Israel and Hamas has
there been any movement
there well these talks are at a very
precarious very um important phase this
there has been an Israeli counter
proposal that has been sent off off and
is now sitting on the desks of Hamas
leaders who are mulling it over we're
hearing that Yahya Sina the military
leader of Hamas in the Gaza Strip is
likely to reject this uh counter
proposal of course this is all coming
from reports slight from speculation and
and from from leaked uh you know sources
but this is not likely to end the talks
we're hearing it is probable that that
that the Hamas leaders will come back
with some changes that want to see to
this deal now the deal that is on the
table looks like it will include
something around a 40-day cessation of
hostilities um and that somewhere in the
number of 33 somewhere between 20 and 33
hostages will be released in a phased uh
phased period and that will be in
exchange for a number many more
Palestinian prisoners now that the
sticking point remains that Hamas
demanding a complete end to hostilities
they want to see a permanent ceasefire
or at least the Pathway to a permanent
ceasefire and that is something that
Israel say that they cannot uh get
behind so you know we could very well
see that this stale stalemate that we've
been seeing over the last several months
will remain but we are expecting to hear
a word from Hamas as early as today
Rebecca thank you that was our
correspondent Rebecca ritters in
Jerusalem